# Chapter 9 -  Next Steps in Deep Learning

This chapter concludes our book. The aim of this book was to get you up to speed with TensorFlow.js and introduce you to enough machine learning and deep learning to get you productive as quickly as possible. This book was also designed to be used a quick reference that can be picked up to familiarize yourself on the topics covered. If you need to review the core API, then you may refer to that chapter, to review the Layers API refer to that chapter, to get an overview of deep learning in general you may reread that chapter and so on.

The next steps would be to continue building upon this example and adding more features to to it to make it more feature-rich. If you would like to dive deeper into the topics of machine learning and deep learning it is recommended to take a course or read a book that focuses more on the theory behind these subjects. This book purposes kept it light on theory so that we can focus on the TensorFlow.js API and provided enough theory to make it clear what the use case for TFJS is and what is actually happening behind the scenes. There are several university level courses and MOOCs that provide a very rigorous introduction to machine learning and deep learning theory and are available to audit for free online.

As web developers we more than likely will not be building these models, but will be embedding them into the applications that we build, in a way that is very similar to what we did in this chapter. However, the more we understand the mechanics of machine learning and deep learning the more value we can add in roles that require us to work with these models on a daily basis. So that models that we are using are not just a "black box" it's recommended to learn more about the different types of artificial neural networks and how they can be built using TensorFlow.

Another good way to learn about ANNs are to read academic papers and then try to build the models yourself. By reading papers you will learn which problems these ANNs are well-suited to solve. You will quickly learn that there are many artificial neural networks and that the problems they solve very much tailored to each ANN's use case but from here you may become inspired to dive deeper into the ones that solve the problems you're interested in or the ones that solve problems you see at work. One problem with implementing models that we read about in papers is the lack of data. For this I would recommend checking out Kaggle (https://www.kaggle.com/) for an extensive list of free data sets you can use for practice as well as data science competitions that you can compete in. Kaggle is also a good place to explore different techniques and algorithms used by members for inspiration.

Another way to understand what TensorFlow.js is doing underneath the hood is to get familiar with the TensorFlow Python library. Before diving into TFJS I worked with TensorFlow in Python and used it to embed TF models into webserver that I was building. When TensorFlow.js was announced I used it to import these same models into the browser to perform inference but it was my experience with the Python version of the library that made this transition seamless. Since we know that true power of TFJS lies in the ability to easily import existing models and them for inference and transfer learning being able to develop models in Python will widen the surface level of the types of models you can create since you will be able to use the extra computing power provided by the Python version of the library as well as leverage the power of several very powerful numerical and scientific computing libraries that have been built for Python.

With this being said, I hope that this book was able to serve its purpose as being a brief introduction to TensorFlow.js as well a quick reference for using its key functionality and core parts of its Core and Layers API. I would like to thank you again for taking the time to purchase and read this book. This has been my first ever book and this has been a very interesting journey to say the least. Good luck and God speed as you continue with your TensorFlow and deep learning journey!
