# Chapter 1: Introducing TensorFlow.js

Welcome to the TensorFlow.js Quick Start Guide, where you learn how to use Google’s powerful TensorFlow library to develop, train and perform inference with machine learning models build from artificial neural networks directly in a browser environment. In this first chapter we will provide a high-level overview of TensorFlow, it’s history, the problems it was meant to solve and how it relates to TensorFlow.js, which is the focus of this book. By the end of this chapter we would have accomplished the following tasks:

- Learn about TensorFlow, the popular Python library that is used to create - artificial neural networks and deep learning models
- Briefly talk about TensforFlow.js, its history and the problems it attempts to solve
- Examine how TensorFlow.js is organized and introduce its Core and Layers APIs
- Discuss how TensorFlow.js can be used used to develop and train models directly in the browser and what this means for web development

## TensorFlow

To have a better understanding of TensorFlow.js it would be helpful to first explore Tensorflow, the popular Python library from which TensorFlow.js gets its name. TensorFlow was originally written in Python and currently has bindings for C++, JavaScript and Node.js. In its purest essence it is often described as a library designed for performing mathematical computations; however, it’s most frequent use case is for creating deep artificial neural networks to perform various tasks in the fields of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning.

The name TensorFlow is derived from how it is used to create deep learning and other models. It allows the user to create a computational graph that takes data inputs and stores them into a data structure known as a tensor. These tensors flow through the computational graph and may have mathematical operations or transformations performed on them that are then passed off to another layer of graph, made up of tensors, to have more operations performed on them or returned to the user as a model output depending on which part of the graph we are in at a given point in time. Since these tensors flow through the graph we get the name TensorFlow. We’ll go deeper into tensors in a later chapter but for now you can think of them as an n-dimensional vector or matrix that represents our model inputs, transformations and predictions. When a developer creates a machine learning model using TensorFlow she is usually creating tensors, performing operations on these tensors using methods provided by the TensorFlow library and then running them in something called a session to train the model for use in a production system. You can think of a session as a thread-safe way to perform complex mathematical computations and matrix transformations in parallel. This allows us to build and deploy complex models that can make use of multiple cores to drastically enhance performance during the training process.

Since TensorFlow is a generic mathematical computation library that allows users to create graphs that represent data and perform transformations on that data it provides a very flexible environment for building many different kinds of artificial neural networks including Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), Deep Belief Networks (DBN) and many more -- even some that have yet to be discovered. In this book we will be using TensorFlow to build a Recurrent Neural Network and a Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) to create an image recognition system and a recommendation engine respectively. However, instead of using the TensorFlow Python or C++ libraries we will be using the JavaScript bindings, which is known as TensorFlow.js.

## TensorFlow.js

Now that we have an understanding of what TensorFlow is we can now take a dive into TensorFlow.js -- the TensorFlow bindings for JavaScript and Node.js. It is essentially a JavaScript library that allows us to build, train and make predictions from deep learning models directly in the browser. TensorFlow.js, also referred to by the shortname TFJS, is the result of a rewrite of another deep learning library called deeplearning.js, which was developed in-house at Google by the Google Brain team in August of 2017. The goal of deeplearning.js was to allow developers to create machine learning models that could be run in the browser. The intention was to make it easier to build, train and retrain models entirely in the browser, thus limiting the requirement to have to make HTTP requests to a remote server to completes these tasks. Deeplearning.js quickly became popular in the web developer and machine learning communities as evident of the many pet projects that were created by members of these communities. Though the library showed great potential it wasn’t quite ready for production use even though an early version was being used to power the celebrated TensorFlow Playground. This prompted the Google Brain team to completely rewrite the library to create what we know today as the Core API provided by TensorFlow.js. Improvements included speeding up its performance and introducing a new deeplearning.js API that mirrors the popular TensorFlow library, hence why it was named TensorFlow.js. These changes provide developers with essentially all of the tools required to build complex models in the web browser environment.

## The Mechanics of TensorFlow.js

The TensorFlow.js library provides the ability to develop, train, retrain and make predictions from deep learning models directly in the browser. If you are familiar with the machine learning process you will probably know that these steps in the process can be very resource intensive. If you’re in any way familiar with web development, particularly front-end web development, you’re probably aware that modern day web browsers, despite their recent advances, have very little resources. With this being said you’re probably wondering how it’s possible for a limited resource development environment such as a web browser is able to run resource intensive processes without causing performance issues or completely running out of resources. Well, the magic comes from the fact that TensorFlow.js uses the computer’s graphics processing unit (GPU) via WebGL to perform this work. This is very similar to how TensorFlow works but since the browser has direct access to the user’s GPU there are no external dependencies to install to achieve this feat. If the user has a graphics card on his or her computer, the library will just target the machine’s GPU via the web browser and WebGL.

## TensorFlow.js APIs

The TensforFlow.js library comes packaged with two APIs that developers can leverage when building and deploying machine learning models for the browser. The first is the low-level Core API that is very reminiscent of the original Python TensorFlow library albeit it does not currently support all of the features that are present in the Python version (approximately 90 or so operations) and, according Google, is roughly one and a half to two times slower than the Python library for inference and up to ten to fifteen times slower at training large models in the browser. The TensforFlow Core API development process is pretty straightforward. The developer builds machine learning models by building a computational graph from scratch, feeding it inputs and running the model in a session. The second API is the Layers API, which is very similar to the API of the Keras library -- another popular tool in the toolkit of the Deep Learning practitioner. The Layers API supports roughly thirty of the most popular operations found in the Keras API. By providing these two APIs developers can harness the power of TensorFlow in a browser environment.

At this point you’re probably wondering why two APIs exist. The answer is that the Layers API provides developers with the powerful ability to quickly build models without having to spend too much time thinking about very fine grain details. However, this is at the expense of losing some level of control when tweaking model parameters. If a developer wants have more control or go to a lower level and dig deeper into the details (no pun intended) she can leverage the power of the Core API.

## The TensorFlow.js Advantage

The beauty of TensforFlow.js is that it brings the power of Machine Learning and Deep Learning to the browser. Long gone are the days where the only way to make predictions from a model would require a full round trip from the browser to the server. Now models can be embedded directly in the browser where input can be fed directly into a model and predictions made. This means that TensorFlow.js is bundled small enough to run the browser and we can now power our applications with the power of Artificial Intelligence without having to make expensive requests to a web server to retrieve model output or feed new data to our models. Another powerful feature is that TensforFlow.js has the ability to allow existing pre-trained models to be loaded into the browser to make predictions or be retrained with new data in the browser in real-time. These can be models generated by the Python or C++ TensforFlow libraries as well as models produced by Keras -- a high level neural networks API written in Python. This makes it easy to port existing machine learning models into a web application for immediate use. This is an extremely powerful feature and an absolute game changer when it comes to bringing Artificial Intelligence to the web.

TensforFlow.js allows us to create web applications that learn in real-time solely in the browser. Just think of how this will change the face of web app development in the future. We now have the ability to create software that can learn from the user in real-time as he or she interacts with the application in his or favorite browser. This can be in the form of a real-time recommendation engine that suggests products a user may want to purchase as the model collects data based on products the user clicked or hovered their mouse over for some period of time. An online brokerage could use real-time order book information to alert retail traders of activity in a particular stock and send real-time alerts to increase trading activity and commission levels. A social network could speed up the performance of a feature that recommends friends to tag in photos by embedding a facial image recognition classifier directly into the browser. An airline company could even leverage TensorFlow.js to create a chatbot that is capable of answering custom questions or making the process of booking flights and hotels more interactive while providing recommendations to the user based on their past travel or even internet browing activity. The possibilities are endless! However, the potential isn’t only limited to the browser environment as Google has recently released Node.js bindings for TensforFlow.js so it can now be levered on the server and embedded into Node applications via the underlying TensorFlow C bindings. This really changes the scope of what is possible in Node applications since the use of TensorFlow.js models are no longer restricted to use only the browser.

## Summary

This concludes the first chapter of our TensorFlow.js quickstart guide. In this chapter we covered TensorFlow, the Python library on which TensorFlow.js is based. We then took a dive into TensorFlow.js and its early beginnings as deeplearning.js. Next we looked at the internals of TensorFlow.js and learned about the Core and Layers APIs provided by the library. Last we opined upon the myriad of application of machine learning in the browser by using TensorFlow.js inside of a web application. In the next chapter we will get our hands dirty and actually setup a Node.js development environment and install TensorFlow.js as a dependency to our environment and build a very trivial model.

TensorFlow.js is packaged as JavaScript library and can either be installed via NPM (the Node Package Manager) and bundled into an application using a package bundler like Rollup or Webpack or loaded into a web page by simply loading the library via a script tag. In the next chapter we will cover how to setup a development environment, install TensforFlow.js and load the library into a browser environment. You will soon witness how easy it is to get up and running with the game changing technology!

## A Note on How This Book is Organized

In this book we began with providing a high-level overview of TensforFlow and its younger sibling TensforFlow.js. In the next chapter we will cover how to setup a Node.js development environment and install Tensflow.js. The following chapters will serve as an introduction to Machine Learning and Deep Learning through an explanation of the theory behind Artificial Neural Networks. We’ll begin with covering single layer perceptrons and work ourselves all the way up to multi-layered deep neural networks. The rest of the book will focus on TensforFlow.js with a focus on its Core and Layers APIs and how to use them to build machine learning models by constructing artificial neural networks. The final chapters will serve as a guide to help you gain an understanding of how to run and retrain existing models in the browser and deploy them to production for use in distributed web applications.
